# Si example
A simple example of calculating Wannier occupation

- Si-all_bands: calculates the occupation number for all 8 sp3 orbitals.
- Si-valence_bands: calculates the occupation number for 4 valence sp3 orbitals.

## Run
### Si-all_bands
1. Run `pw.x < Si.scf > Si.scf.out` to generate charge density.
2. Run `pw.x < Si.nscf > Si.nscf.out` to generate wavefunctions on a uniform k grid.
3. Run `wannier90.x -pp Si` to generate k-points neighbors.
4. Run `pw2wannier90.x < Si.pw2wan > Si.pw2wan.out` to generate `.amn` and `.mmn` files.
5. Run `wannier90.x Si` to generate `Si_u.mat`, `Si_u_dis.mat` and `Si_hr.dat` files.
6. Run `wanocc.py -seed_name Si -spin unpolarized -dis` to get Wannier occupations


### Si-valence_bands
1. Run `pw.x < Si.scf > Si.scf.out` to generate charge density.
2. Run `pw.x < Si.nscf > Si.nscf.out` to generate wavefunctions on a uniform k grid.
3. Run `wannier90.x -pp Si` to generate k-points neighbors.
4. Run `pw2wannier90.x < Si.pw2wan > Si.pw2wan.out` to generate `.amn` and `.mmn` files.
5. Run `wannier90.x Si` to generate `Si_u.mat`, `Si_hr.dat` files.
6. Run `./wanocc.py -seed_name Si -spin unpolarized -bnd_exc 5-12` to get Wannier occupations

## Analysis
### Occupation matrix
`wanocc.py` will generate occupation matrix `seed_name_occ.dat`. We can also Fourier transform it back to reciprocal space:

$$
\rho_{mn}(\mathbf{k}) = \sum_{\mathbf{R}} \frac{1}{d_{\mathbf{R}}} e^{i\mathbf{k}\cdot\mathbf{R}} \rho_{mn}(\mathbf{R})
$$

where $d_{\mathbf{R}}$ is the Wigner-Seitz cell multiplicity of the lattice
vector $\mathbf{R}$.

We can further diagonalize it to get occupation numbers for each band at a specific k-point.
This is done by the script `P_eig.py`. For example, we can run
```
python P_eig.py -seed_name Si -k "0,0,0"
```
and compare it with the band occupation calculated from DFT.

### Hamiltonian matrix
The same can be done to the Hamiltonian:

$$
H_{mn}(\mathbf{k}) = \sum_{\mathbf{R}} \frac{1}{d_{\mathbf{R}}} e^{i\mathbf{k}\cdot\mathbf{R}} H_{mn}(\mathbf{R})
$$

and the eigenvalues can be generated by
```
python H_eig.py -seed_name Si -k "0,0,0"
```
The results can be benchmarked against DFT values.

### Total bend energies
We can also calculate the total band energies by taking the trace of the product of the density matrix (occupation matrix) and the Hamiltonian matrix in the Wannier basis.

$$
E_\mathrm{band} = \sum_\mathbf{R} \frac{1}{d^2_{\mathbf{R}}} \mathrm{Tr}[\rho(\mathbf{R}) H^\dagger(\mathbf{R})]
$$

This can be done using the script `PH.py`. For example, we can run
```
python PH.py -seed_name Si
```
and compare the total band energy with the DFT total energy.
